Streamline workflow (#1838)
PyPSA/pypsa-eur: doc/foresight.rst

Foresight Options
#####################

> Planning horizons and warm starts

Reviewer: I would eliminate use of term "warm-start" due to ambiguity with solver warmstart.
```suggestion
Planning horizons
```

=================================

All foresight modes share the same ``planning_horizons`` list at the top of the
configuration file. The workflow iterates over this list and composes/solves a
network for each year while persisting two canonical artefacts:

- ``resources/{run}/networks/composed_{horizon}.nc`` — output of
  :mod:`scripts/compose_network`
- ``results/{run}/networks/solved_{horizon}.nc`` — output of
  :mod:`scripts/solve_network`

Warm-start behaviour depends on the foresight mode:

- ``overnight`` expects a single value and does **not** reuse previous years.
- ``myopic`` requires at least two horizons and feeds the solved network from
  the previous year ``RESULTS/networks/solved_{prev}.nc`` into the next
  ``compose_network`` call.
- ``perfect`` also iterates sequentially but consumes

>   ``networks/composed_{prev}.nc`` to build the full multi-period optimisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``perfect`` also iterates sequentially but consumes
  ``networks/composed_{prev}.nc`` to build the full multi-period optimisation, after which the complete network is solved.
```

When in doubt, inspect :mod:`rules/compose.smk` to see how the helpers
``solved_previous_horizon`` and ``compose_previous_horizon`` assemble these

> paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
can be removed

The following options included in the ``config/config.yaml`` file  are relevant for the
myopic code.

> The ``{horizon}`` wildcard indicates the year in which the network is optimized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``{horizon}`` wildcard indicates the year for which the network is optimized.
```

Options
--------------

Carbon Budget Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The carbon budget for the entire transition path can be specified in the
``co2_budget`` section in ``config/config.yaml`` using a unified configuration
structure that works consistently across all three foresight modes (overnight,

> myopic, perfect).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The carbon budget for the entire transition path can be specified in the
``co2_budget`` section in ``config/config.yaml`` for all three foresight modes (overnight, myopic, perfect).
```

    upper: null       # null | scalar | {year: value}
    lower: null       # null | scalar | {year: value}

**Constraint semantics:**

- ``upper``/``lower`` as a **dict**: apply constraints only for explicitly listed years
  (omitted years are unconstrained). In perfect foresight, these constraints are attached
  to the corresponding investment period. Use ``<year>: null`` to explicitly clear an
  inherited default bound for a specific year.
- ``upper``/``lower`` as a **scalar**: add a single timeless CO₂ constraint (no investment
  period reference).

  - **overnight**: one CO₂ constraint for the solved model.
  - **myopic**: one CO₂ constraint for each solved horizon.
  - **perfect**: one joint CO₂ constraint across all horizons, added in the final horizon.

**Example 1: Per-period caps with fraction values**

.. code:: yaml

  co2_budget:
    values: fraction
    upper:
      2030: 0.450  # 45% of 1990 emissions
      2040: 0.100
      2050: 0.000

**Example 2: Scalar cap (absolute values)**

.. code:: yaml

  co2_budget:
    values: absolute
    upper: 2.04  # Gt CO2/year, same semantics across foresight modes (see above)

**Example 3: Selective year constraints**

> 

Reviewer: Was the documentation below here for `add_existing_baseyear` (the function remains) moved somewhere? Please do not just remove this.

.. code:: yaml

  planning_horizons: [2030, 2040, 2050]

  co2_budget:
    values: absolute
    upper:
      2030: 2.0
      2050: 0.0
      # 2040 not specified -> no upper constraint for 2040
    lower:
      2030: 0.5

**Emissions scope:**

The ``emissions_scope`` parameter determines which greenhouse gas(es) are accounted for
when calculating the 1990 baseline for ``values: fraction`` and applying the corresponding
budget constraints. This parameter corresponds to the ``Pollutant_name`` field in the EEA
UNFCCC emissions database.

Available options:

- ``All greenhouse gases - (CO2 equivalent)`` - All greenhouse gases in CO₂-equivalent,
  including CO₂, CH₄, N₂O, and fluorinated gases (HFCs, PFCs, SF₆, NF₃) (**default**)
- ``CO2`` - Carbon dioxide only
- ``CH4`` - Methane emissions only

> - ``N2O`` - Nitrous oxide emissions only

Reviewer: I would phrase this more conservatively. This sounds as if all of these emissions are tracked, but only CO2 currently is. At the moment the only viable option is CO2!

The choice of emissions scope affects:

1. **Baseline calculations**: Historical emissions used to calculate budget fractions
   (e.g., "55% reduction from 1990" requires knowing 1990 emissions)
2. **Constraint application**: The optimization constraints in the network model apply
   to the selected emissions scope

.. note::
   The default uses all greenhouse gases in CO₂-equivalent to align with EU climate policy
   targets (e.g., Fit for 55: 55% GHG reduction by 2030, climate neutrality by 2050). This
   ensures budget calculations use the same baseline as official climate targets. While the
   energy system model primarily tracks and optimizes CO₂ emissions from energy use, using
   all GHGs for baseline calculations provides proper context for the model's emission
   constraints relative to economy-wide climate goals. Non-energy GHG emissions (e.g., from
   agriculture, industrial processes) are typically handled as exogenous assumptions or

>    boundary conditions.

Reviewer: Double-check. AFAIK, PyPSA-Eur only covers CO2 emissions, not CO2 equivalents...

General myopic code structure
---------------------------------

The myopic workflow iterates through ``planning_horizons`` inside a single
:mod:`scripts/compose_network` entry point. For each horizon the rule performs:

1. Load ``networks/clustered.nc`` together with all derived assets (busmaps,
   demand profiles, sectoral inputs).

> 2. If ``existing_capacities.enabled`` is ``true``, merge the brownfield assets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. If ``existing_capacities.enabled`` is ``true``, insert the brownfield assets
```
merge with what?

   built before the base year via ``add_existing_capacities`` inside
   ``compose_network.py``.
3. When ``w.horizon`` is not the first element of ``planning_horizons``, import
   ``RESULTS/networks/solved_{prev}.nc`` (myopic) or

>    ``networks/composed_{prev}.nc`` (perfect) as the warm-start baseline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ``networks/composed_{prev}.nc`` (perfect) as the solution from the previous planning horizon.
```
avoid warm-start term

4. Persist the assembled network as ``resources/{run}/networks/composed_{horizon}.nc``.

After composition, :mod:`scripts/solve_network` optimises every horizon to
produce ``results/{run}/networks/solved_{horizon}.nc``. Downstream plotting and
reporting stages such as :mod:`scripts/make_summary` consume these solved files
directly, so all foresight modes share the same results directory structure.

Rule overview
--------------

- :mod:`compose_network`

  Performs the per-horizon assembly of simplified assets, existing capacities,

>   and warm-start seeding within a single entry point. Custom extensions should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and investments from solved previous planning horizons.
```

  hook into the clearly marked sections of ``scripts/compose_network.py``.

  .. note::

     Earlier workflows used dedicated ``add_*`` and ``prepare_*`` rules. Keep
     bespoke injections inside ``compose_network.py`` to stay aligned with the
     streamlined pipeline.

- :mod:`solve_network`

>   Applies the configured solver to each composed network and writes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Solves each composed network and writes
```

  ``results/{run}/networks/solved_{horizon}.nc`` alongside solver logs stored

>   in ``results/{run}/logs/solve_network``.

Reviewer: could remove part on solver logs to avoid becoming too verbose

- :mod:`make_summary`

>   Converts the solved networks into CSV/plot outputs for downstream dashboards.

Reviewer: Make summary doesn't do plots, right? And we don't have any dashboard.
```suggestion
  Creates summaries as CSV files for solved networks.
```
